# Personal Statement First Draft

Violet Moller’s *The Map of Knowledge*, a history of ideas and their path throughout the centuries, was a major turning point for me. In this book I discovered my curiosity for the Islamic Golden Age and found a historical focus that would consume my research and reading. Moller explores the cities of Baghdad, Cordoba and Toledo, and their role in transmitting the knowledge of the past into the future. In popular history, it is widely assumed that 500-1500 CE were ‘the dark ages’, a scientific stagnation. Moller’s book broke the mould for me. I realised that this period, especially in the Arab world, was not ‘dark’, but rather a colourful renaissance of new ideas and perspectives. This engendered in me an urge to uncover more and I set about reading all I could. From Frankopan’s *The Silk Roads* to various research papers, I devoured the literature on the subject. I had the opportunity to visit Toledo whilst on a choral tour to Spain, and I was delighted that my research was able to take a physical form.

To further develop my knowledge, I chose to write my Extended Project Qualification on Ibn Sina and his contribution to Western Philosophy. Analysing Ibn Sina and his contemporaries was intriguing and I found my interest extended yet further. Finding a focus in my studies has allowed me to channel my research and foster a greater love of History.

Studying A-Level History has been a thoroughly enjoyable experience.  Studying the Making of Modern Britain, 1951-2007, and Tsarist and Communist Russia, 1855-1964,  has allowed me to analyse two very different time periods and places, and both topics have inspired further reading. It has been particularly intriguing to learn of the complex history of Russia and the USSR and how this has contributed to events of the present day. The coursework element, an essay on the build-up to the abolition of slavery in 1838 in the century prior, has been another opportunity for me to research and write on a complex and engaging subject.

Aside from History, I study Economics and Philosophy. I find that both of these subjects are highly relevant to History, complementing it well, and enable me to achieve a deeper understanding into the history topics that I study, and the inner workings of the subject. I am able to apply my knowledge of economics to my research and it has aided me in analysing historical economic policies in greater detail. In terms of Philosophy, I have found that it can be applied to History effectively in the form of Historiography, and have enjoyed reading Tosh’s *The Pursuit of History*.

History is a subject fuelled by writing and in this I take great pleasure. The Fitzwilliam College History Prize was an opportunity for me to research a topic which I may otherwise have overlooked. Writing on Submarine Telegraphy in the late 19th-century gave me the opportunity to expand my knowledge ever further. I posed the question: ‘To what extent did the submarine cable change the world?’, specifically focusing on economics, warfare and communication. I particularly enjoyed the specificity of this essay as it required that I have a comprehensive understanding of the chosen subject, allowing me to research in more detail than ever before. I was highly commended and was informed that the judges took particular note of my attention to detail and the in-depth analysis that my essay demonstrated.

Debate is also central to the study of History and it has been useful to be able to relate academic debate to my experience as an active debater within my school and elsewhere. My critical analysis and research skills have developed as a result. Participating in many competitions run by the Debaters Association of Victoria in Australia evolved my skills in public speaking and quick-thinking, and the high standard of the competitions pushed me to improve. Along with debate my philosophical pursuits has given rise to a love of rational discussion and disagreement over key aspects of the subject.