# Inverted Qualia 12 Marker

</br>

If we can show that it is possible for two people to have identical functions but differing phenomenal properties, then we can show functionalism to be false. For example, suppose that two people are looking at ripe tomatoes and fresh grass. They have learned to use the word ‘red’ to describe the tomatoes, and ‘green’ to describe the grass (having been taught the same language from birth). Both would say that the tomatoes are red and the grass is green, but the way a ripe tomato looks to the first person may be the way grass looks to the second. Functionally, they are identical, and yet experience different colours. ‘The way grass looks to you’ and ‘The way grass looks to me’ are caused by the same inputs, and cause the same outputs, but refer to different qualia. If this is possible, then functionalism is false, because it denies the possibility of inverted qualia.

The functionalist can reply that, in the example above, the two people are not functionally identical. There are small difference, because causal relations of phenomenal properties are complex. The functionalist argues that we have no reason to think that qualia can be inverted in this way. The main claim in the argument from inverted qualia is that two brains could function in the same way, but we would have different qualia. This is not being proposed as an empirical hypothesis, because it is not tested against empirical means. We have no evidence that identical brain functioning gives rise to different experiences in different people. Further, there could be undetectable empirical differences (undetectable because they make no functional difference). Science does not, however, naturally proceed by supposing undetectable facts, and so the argument is either false, or bad science.