---
Type: Prep
Created: 11th September 2023
Subject: Philosophy
Category: Metaphysics of Mind
---

# Substance Dualism Essay

</br>

Substance dualism is the claim that the mental and the physical are two separate, distinct substances. The substance dualist argues that physical objects have extension, and are non-thinking, and that the mind has no extension, and is thinking. The mind is responsible for thoughts and emotions, whereas the physical represents our bodies and the external world. In this essay, I shall argue that Substance Dualism  does not provide a satisfactory account of the mind.

The first argument that Descartes, the most famous advocate of Substance Dualism, puts forward is the conceivability argument. This is the claim that, because we are able to conceive of mind and body existing separately, without the mind depending upon the body, they must be distinct substances. Descartes argues that because we can form a clear and distinct conception of these two substances, then it is metaphysically possible for them to be separate in reality. However, this argument comes under criticism. Critics argue that Descartes is confused or lacking information about the very concept of thinking - we may well find that we cannot clearly and distinctly conceive of mind without body if we knew the true nature of thinking. Philosophical behaviourism argues that the mind can be understood in terms of behaviour. Thoughts, emotions, beliefs - these are all how something behaves. If a mind has no body, then something cannot behave, and if there is no behaviour, there cannot be a mind. If this theory is accurate, then we see that mind without body is inconceivable. Even Descartes accepts this theory. Further to this, critics raise the issue that what is conceivable may not be metaphysically possible. They say that analytic and necessary truths may be separated. We may use the ‘masked man’ example to show this. I believe that a Masked Man has robbed the bank, and also believe that my father has *not* robbed the bank. Therefore I think that the Masked Man is not my father. It is metaphysically possible that the masked man is not my father. If my father is not the Masked Man, then it is metaphysically impossible for him to be the Masked Ma n. This means that it is also metaphysically impossible for someone else’s father to be the Masked Man (as no one can be somebody else). If we apply this theory to Descartes argument, then we find that his argument does not follow. Thus, the argument from conceivability fails, and Substance Dualism is weakened.

The second argument that Descartes posits is that of indivisibility. He argues that the body (physical) can be divided (e.g. being chopped in half), whereas the mind cannot be divided. Descartes claims that if mind and body were the same thing, then they would have the same properties. But they don’t. Thus, due to this lack of shared property, the two are distinct substances. Again, we find that this argument is subject to criticism as well. It is claimed that the mind is in fact divisible, in a sense. Cases of mental illness (e.g. multiple personalities) suggest that the mind can be divided, as these parts of the brain are unable to communicate with others. It therefore makes sense to discuss ‘parts’ of the mind. Descartes’ response to this is that this ‘divisibility’ is meant in an entirely different way to the divisibility of the body. Bodies are spatially divisible, whereas the mind is purely functionally divisible. Therefore, the indivisibility argument stands.

However, Ryle argues that Substance Dualism is not a satisfactory theory of mind and accuses Descartes of making a category mistake. We can use the example of Oxford University. If you were shown around the university, seeing the colleges, the different departments, etc. then you could still say ‘but I haven’t yet seen the university’. You have, however, misunderstood the concept of ‘university’, thinking is to be a separate thing. You have made a category mistake. Similarly, Ryle argues that Descartes has made a category mistake in thinking that the mind is like the body - a ‘thing’. It is a mistake to assume that these operate in the same way. People wrongly inferred that mental concepts are non-physical processes which occur in non-physical substance. However, mental concepts are not like physical concepts. It is my opinion that Ryle’s argument holds, and thus Substance Dualism is undermined entirely.

Due to these criticisms of Substance Dualism, and despite the indivisibility argument seeming to hold, I find these arguments for Substance Dualism to be unconvincing. Ryle’s category mistake argument is my primary reason for believing this, as he posits that Substance Dualism has made a fundamental mistake in the very basis of its arguments, which undermines the entire theory. Therefore, I find that Substance Dualism does not provide a satisfactory theory of mind.
