# Epistemology 25 Mark Questions


</br>

## Tripartite View

### How should propositional knowledge be defined?

Propositional knowledge has many proposed definitions. In this essay, I shall test various definitions such as Justified True Belief, No False Lemmas, and Sosa’s Virtue Epistemology against multiple counter-examples, and will argue that Sosa’s virtue epistemology provides the correct definition of propositional knowledge.

Propositional knowledge is knowledge that can be expressed by a declarative statement (‘knowledge-that’). It has truth value (i.e. a proposition is either true or false), and can be a priori and a posteriori, analytic and synthetic. It exists as opposed to ability knowledge (‘knowledge-how’), which is our knowledge of how to do something such as ride a bike. Ability knowledge is subconscious and difficult to explain; and acquaintance knowledge, which is our knowledge of a place or person, such as my knowledge of Oxford or of my best friend.

Previously, the commonly accepted definition of knowledge was Justified True Belief (henceforth, JTB). This definition claimed that S knows that P if and only if: P is true; S believes that P; and S’ belief that P is justified. This would, at first glance, seem to be a sound definition. However, in the mid-20th century, Edmund Gettier proposed two counter-examples that seemed to disprove JTB as a theory of knowledge. The first runs as follows: Smith and Jones are both applying for a job; Smith overhears the boss saying that Jones will get the job; at the same time, he sees Jones counting out 10 coins from his pocket; he thus forms the belief that ‘the man with 10 coins in his pocket will get the job’; however, Smith gets the job, and to his surprise, he also has 10 coins in his pocket. So, it would seem that his belief is true (the man with 10 coins in his pocket did indeed get the job), he believes it, and it is justified (the boss would know who was going to get the job, so the information was reliable). This creates a scenario where Smith has knowledge by pure coincidence under JTB, and Gettier objects that this cannot be correct. 

In an attempt to overcome this counter-example, a second definition can be offered, namely that of ‘No False Lemmas’. This theory claims that S knows that P if and only if: P is true; S believes that P; and S’ belief that P does not arise from a false lemma (i.e. a false claim part way through a thought process). In the case of Smith and Jones, it would seem that No False Lemmas prevents Smith from having knowledge through luck, because the boss’ claim is a false lemma, and his belief arises from this, and therefore is discounted as not being knowledge, despite being true and believed. However, a second counter-example can be proposed which challenges this definition. Zagzebski introduces her example of ‘Dr Jones and the Virus’, which runs as follows: Dr Jones is treating Smith, her patient. He is presenting with symptoms of Virus X, and his bloodwork and lab results indicate the same. So, Jones concludes that he has Virus X. However, these symptoms and results have actually arisen from Virus Y, which is, by all appearances, almost identical. But, by coincidence, after these tests have been done, Smith is infected with Virus X. Therefore, when Dr Jones forms her belief that ‘Smith has Virus X’, it is a true belief, and it has not arisen from a false lemma, as all the evidence was correct. This counter-example is successful, and it cannot therefore be argued that JTB + No False Lemmas is the correct definition of knowledge.

Neither of the preceding definitions have been able to overcome coincidental knowledge in the counter-examples presented. Zagzebski argues that this is because there is a ‘truth-gap’ between truth and any third condition that attempts to strengthen justification, and whilst this truth-gap is present, counter-examples can be created to disprove theories.

Sosa’s account of Virtue Epistemology overcomes this. To understand this, we must first define an intellectual virtue. Zagzebski’s definition is that an intellectual virtue (in a similar way to Aristotle’s account of virtue) is one that is motivated to find the truth, and succeeds in this endeavour. Sosa claims that S knows that P if and only if: P is Accurate (the belief is true); S’ belief that P is Adroit (S is intellectually virtuous); and P is true as a result of an act of intellectual virtue - it is Apt. This is known as Sosa’s ‘Triple A’ Virtue Epistemology. In defining knowledge as such, Sosa is able to overcome counter-examples such as those above because the knowledge in these is not *apt*. Aptness bridges the truth-gap between truth and the third condition by directly linking the two, and so coincidental knowledge is not possible. In the case of Smith and Jones, Smith’s belief that ‘the man with 10 coins in his pocket will get the job’ is not apt, because its truth does not arise from an act of intellectual virtue - it is merely a coincidental connection. Similarly, in the case of Dr Jones and the virus, Dr Jones’ belief that Smith has Virus X is not counted as knowledge, because it is again, not apt - there is no link between the truth of her belief and the use of intellectual virtue. 

Sosa’s definition bridges the gap between truth and the third condition, and as a result is able to overcome counter-examples modelled on this truth-gap. Other definitions such as JTB and No False Lemmas cannot do this, and so it can clearly be shown that Sosa’s Virtue Epistemology is the strongest definition of knowledge.

</br>

## Direct Realism

### Assess Direct Realism

Direct Realism is the claim that we perceive the mind-independent external world exactly as it is. However, it is a highly contentious view, and can be objected to in various ways. Thus, in this essay, it shall be argued that Direct Realism is false.

Mind-independent objects are those which are not dependent upon our perception for their existence - rather, they rely on some other cause. Direct Realism claims that we perceive these directly, without any alteration in their objective appearance.

One issue that can be raised with Direct Realism is the argument from time-lag. We may object that we do not perceive the mind-independent external world directly, because what we perceive has a time-lag. For example, the sun at the present moment looks different to our perception of it because it is 8 light-minutes away, and so we see the sun as it was 8 minutes ago. If we perceived directly, then it would seem that we would have to perceive the sun as it is at the present moment. Even when perceiving objects that are closer, there is a time lag between the reflection of light waves from objects and our perception of said light waves. Therefore, it can be argued that due to the time-lag of our perception, we do not perceive mind-independent physical objects directly, and thus direct realism is false. However, the Direct Realist can respond to the argument from time-lag. They can argue that the argument confuses what we perceive and how we perceive it. For example, we perceive the sun, but we perceive it via light waves. Direct Realism can still claim that we perceive the sun directly, but just as it was minutes ago. We still directly perceive the light waves that it emits, and the workings of physics do not apply to our perception in this way. Whilst Direct Realism is weakened by this objection, the Direct Realist response is strong enough to overcome this objection.

We can also object to Direct Realism by arguing from illusion. Take, for example, a pencil that is in water. As it enters the waterline, there seems to be a kink in the pencil, making it look crooked. It is, of course, not crooked, and its appearance is just a result of refraction. However, Direct Realism would have to claim that the pencil is in fact crooked, because it argues that we perceive mind-independent physical objects exactly as they appear. Therefore, if the pencil *appears* crooked, then it *is* crooked. This seems absurd, and so we can argue that Direct Realism cannot hold. The Direct Realist can respond by appealing to relational properties. A relational property is a property that relates to something else. For example, ‘being to the north of’ is a relational property. The Direct Realist would argue that the pencil in water has the relational property of ‘looking crooked in water’ (the property is related to water and is therefore relational), but is not crooked in reality. This allows Direct Realism to maintain the claim that we perceive mind-independent physical objects directly, because our perception of the pencil as crooked is a result of relational properties - it simply appears crooked in certain circumstances.

However, another issue with Direct Realism can be raised, which raises serious doubts over its plausibility. Similarly to an illusion, a hallucination causes us to perceive something deceiving. However, we cannot respond to hallucination by appealing to relational properties, because the content of our hallucinations are mind-dependent, and do not really exist. Therefore, they cannot have relational properties, because our hallucinations have no bearing in the mind-independent external world. The Direct Realist has no response to this, and so we can argue that Direct Realism fails entirely because it cannot account for our perception of hallucinations. We have no way of distinguishing hallucination from objective reality, and this lack of distinction causes Direct Realism to collapse.

In conclusion, despite sound responses to the objection from time-lag and illusion, Direct Realism’s failure to account for hallucinations and inability to distinguish them from objective reality causes us to conclude that it cannot hold. If we take Direct Realism to be true, then we must accept the possibility of our reality being a deception, a hallucination. This is clearly absurd, and so we must replace Direct Realism with a different theory of perception.

</br>

### Assess Indirect Realism

Indirect Realism is the claim that all of our perceptions are 

</br>

### Is Berkeley’s idealist account of perception convincing?

Idealism, the claim that all of our perceptions are entirely mind-dependent, has numerous arguments in its favour. However, the arguments for the most fundamental aspects of Idealism fail in their entirety, and thus this essay will conclude that Berkeley’s idealist account of perception is not convincing, because it is unable to suitably explain hallucinations and dreaming, and fails to prove that the existence of mind-independent objects is impossible.

Idealism claims that all of our perceptions are entirely mind-dependent copies of ideas in the mind of God. Berkeley first establishes this through attacking Locke’s primary/secondary quality distinction. Locke argues that physical objects possess two types of qualities: primary qualities are those which do not change as circumstances change, such as size, shape (molecular structure in this case), etc; Secondary qualities are those which are subject to perceptual variation, and might change depending on the perspective of the agent, such as colour, temperature, and the like. Locke argues that the former are mind-independent, and the latter he concedes to be mind-dependent. However, Berkeley argues that both of these types of qualities are mind-dependent. He says that, like secondary qualities, primary qualities also change depending on who perceives them and how they do so: an object might look larger if it is closer and vice versa, or might look small to a human but large to a mouse. Such variation, Berkeley argues, shows that primary qualities are also subject to perceptual variation, and thus they must be mind-independent, as secondary qualities are. This argument is sound, but Berkeley’s further arguments for idealism are significantly weaker.

In arguing for Idealism, Berkeley puts forward his ‘Master Argument’, in an attempt to prove that it is impossible to conceive of a mind-independent object. He argues that we are not able to conceive of a tree that exists unperceived (i.e. mind-independent), because the moment that we conceive of said tree in our minds, its existence becomes mind-dependent. Thus, Berkeley argues that a mind-independent physical object is inconceivable, as the second that it is conceived it is perceived mind-dependently. This supports Idealism, as it serves to prove that the concept of a mind-independent external world is absurd, because we cannot even conceive of such a thing. However, this argument has multiple flaws. The main objection to Berkeley’s argument is that he equates the idea of an object with the object itself. The *idea* of a mind-independent tree may not be conceivable - the idea does indeed become mind-dependent when we think about it - but this is not to say that the tree itself is mind-dependent. The concepts of ideas and physical objects are entirely separate, and thus Berkeley’s equivocation of the two causes his master argument to fail entirely. Such failure must cause us to conclude that Berkeley has not established that the existence of the external world is impossible, and thus the claim of Idealism is weakened substantially. It can be weakened further by application of the criticisms that face Direct Realism too: that of illusion, hallucination, and dreaming.

The central claim of Idealism can be summed up as ‘to be is to be perceived’. However, we can object that this claim falls foul of the objection from illusion. Say that there is a pencil in water. Because of refraction, the pencil looks to be crooked at the point when it enters the water. Of course, we know that this is because of a scientific principle, but Idealism would have to claim that this illusion is, in fact, reality. This is because Idealism makes no distinction between appearance and reality, due to a lack of ‘reality’ in the regular sense - Berkeley’s reality is that of the mind of God. However, Berkeley would argue that this is no objection, but simply a statement of fact. He would argue that the pencil is indeed crooked, and our perception is correct. Berkeley’s incorporation of this fallacy into his theory causes it to become not a fallacy, but a part of his argument for Idealism and his concept of a subjective reality. Therefore, Idealism can hold in the face of the argument from hallucination, and the theory takes no damage from this objection. However, we can apply the same argument in terms of hallucination and dreaming.

Because, as is evident, Idealism makes no distinction between appearance and reality - “to be is to be perceived” - we can object that Idealism cannot distinguish our reality from hallucinations and dreaming. If, for example, I were to hallucinate that unicorns existed, or dream that I could fly, Idealism would have to claim that I can indeed fly and unicorns do exist. This seems entirely absurd: these experiences cannot be part of our experience, as they seem to defy basic logic and our knowledge of the world. Berkeley seemingly has no response to this objection, which causes us to conclude that the objection succeeds, and Idealism fails as a result of its lack of distinction between hallucination and dreaming and reality.

In conclusion, Idealism fails to establish the impossibility of a mind-independent external world, leaving the possibility open, and fails to sufficiently distinguish between hallucination/dreaming and reality. Such failure of claims and concepts which Idealism is wholly contingent upon forces us to conclude that Idealism is not a convincing account of perception, and it fails entirely.



## Limits of Knowledge

### Do any arguments successfully defeat global scepticism?

Global scepticism is the theory, conceived in this form by Descartes, that we cannot trust our perceptions and have reason to doubt all of our knowledge and our perceptions. There are various responses to this which attempt to ascertain a basic level of knowledge that we can know to be true. Descartes argues for the existence of God as knowledge that we cannot doubt; Reliabilism can claim that we cannot doubt things that can be realised through a reliable process; and Russell argues that the existence of the external world is the best hypothesis. This essay shall argue that the Reliabilist claim is the most plausible, because as long as we are not being deceived, our perception is argued to be a reliable method of forming true beliefs, allowing us to have knowledge of the external world.

Descartes forms his concept of global scepticism in his ‘three waves of doubt’. The first wave is the argument that we can doubt our knowledge through illusion, the second that we can doubt our knowledge because of dreams. The third wave of doubt forms global scepticism, and is the argument that we can doubt our knowledge and perceptions because the possibility exists that we are perpetually being deceived by an evil demon, whose sole intent is to make us believe things that are not actually true. If this theory is correct, then we cannot know anything, because everything that we perceive is a deliberate deception. This would cause a major issue, and so we must provide a response to it that successfully establishes at least one form of knowledge. Descartes’ arguments attempt to ascertain knowledge of the self, knowledge of God, and knowledge of the external world. Here, we shall focus on Descartes’ arguments for the existence of God, specifically the Trademark argument

Descartes’ Trademark argument is an attempt to prove the existence of God, and thus overcome global scepticism. It runs as follows: I have the concept of God, which is the concept of something that is both infinite and perfect. As a mind (a claim which Descartes has allegedly established through his cogito), I can create many ideas, such as of people and physical objects. I myself, am finite, whereas the concept of God is infinite. I could not have created such a concept, because the cause of this concept must have as much reality as the concept. The only being that has as much reality as the *concept* of God is God himself, and therefore he must be the cause of my concept of God. Therefore, God exists. Now that Descartes has supposedly proved the existence of God, he argues that, because God has every perfection, he would not deceive us, nor allow us to be deceived. Therefore, Descartes argues, we cannot possibly be being deceived by an evil demon, because a perfect God would not allow it. This would seem to overcome global scepticism, if not for the various objections to the trademark argument. The strongest objection is that Descartes is mistaken about the nature of causation. If we apply Hume’s fork to his trademark argument, then we may argue that, contrary to Descartes belief, not every concept must have a cause. The statement that ‘some things do not have a cause’ does not cause a contradiction (as the statement ‘a married bachelor’ does), and therefore the statement that ‘everything has a cause’ is not analytically true. Whilst this belief may result from our experience, this only makes it contingently true, because it still may be false. We cannot show that everything has a cause without exception. Furthermore, if we cannot know that everything has a cause, then neither can we prove that the cause of a concept must have as much reality as the concept itself. If we cannot prove either of these claims, then the premises of the Trademark argument cannot be proved, and thus, it cannot hold. This means that Descartes has failed to establish the existence of God, and therefore we can argue that the evil demon can still deceive us (there is nothing to protect us against this), and so global scepticism prevails.

In the face of Descartes’ failure, we must turn to another theory to overcome global scepticism, namely Russell’s argument that the existence of the external world is the best hypothesis. Russell argues that out of these two statements - “the external world does not exist and is not the cause of my perceptions”; and “the external world exists and is the cause of my perceptions” - the latter is the most plausible, and so should be accepted as the ‘best hypothesis’. He accepts that we cannot know whether the external world exists *for certain*, thus allowing some element of scepticism, but suggests that its existence corresponds to our experience and is therefore the *best* hypothesis that we can come up with. Russell uses the example of a cat to illustrate this: if we are looking at a cat sitting on a sofa, and we turn away, and when we turn back it is on the floor, there are two possible explanations: either the cat stopped existing when we turned away, and began existing in a different place when we looked back; or the cat moved from the sofa to the floor through a series of intermediary positions. Russell argues that the latter is the most plausible, and this is the statement that supports the existence of the external world. However, we can object to Russell’s argument by arguing that it remains a hypothesis. We have not established whether the external world *actually* exists, but it is just the most likely scenario. This is a significant weakness, because the evil demon *could* still be deceiving us. We have no way of knowing. Furthermore, we can argue that, if we were being deceived, the two statements about whether the external world exists could be equally likely, and we again have no way of knowing this *because we are being deceived*. Thus, it can be concluded that Russell’s argument fails in overcoming global scepticism.

Reliabilism also posits a theory in order to disprove global scepticism, arguing that we can gain knowledge through the use of reliable cognitive processes. Take the statement ‘I have hands’, for example. If I am a brain in a vat, then I do not have hands. But if I am not, then I can prove that I do have hands by appealing to my vision being a reliable cognitive process (i.e. a process which tends to produce a high proportion of true beliefs). We do not need to know whether or not we are being deceived: if we are not, then we can still form true beliefs through reliable cognitive processes. In short, we can know a proposition without *knowing* that we know a proposition. We can make an objection to this argument: if I am a brain in a vat, then my cognitive processes are unreliable, and I cannot trust them to form true beliefs - even the Reliabilist would agree with this. This objection is limited, however, because the reliabilist can easily respond by reasserting their prior claims, i.e. that there is a difference between *knowing that* and *knowing that I know that*. Therefore, it can be argued that Reliabilism successfully defeats scepticism, because it knocks down the main criticism made against it and seems to allow us knowledge in the face of doubt.

We may therefore conclude that, because Descartes’ attempt to establish the existence of God via the trademark argument, and Russell’s attempt to establish the existence of the external world as the ‘best hypothesis’ both fail in light of various criticisms, the argument that the Reliabilist puts forth is the most successful, and its overcoming of the criticisms put to it allow it to be concluded that it is able to overcome global scepticism, meaning that we *can* have knowledge.

