# Epistemology 12 Mark Questions

</br>

## What is Knowledge?

</br>

### Briefly outline the tripartite view of knowledge and explain how a case of lucky true belief can be used to argue against this

The Tripartite View of knowledge claims that we can define knowledge as follows: Some claim, $p$, is true; one believes that $p$; and one’s belief that $p$ is justified (by any means). This is commonly known as ‘Justified True Belief’ (henceforth, ‘JTB’). For example, if I believe that ‘The sky is blue’, then this would count as knowledge under the JTB definition: it is true, the sky is indeed blue; I believe it; and I can justify my belief by looking up at the sky and seeing that it is blue. These three parts can be said to be parts of knowledge because 1) if a proposition is false, it is merely a belief, and therefore truth (in whatever form, whether societal truth or truth by correspondence between itself and objective reality), is a part of knowledge; 2) you cannot know something without also believing it; and 3) knowledge without justification is just an unsubstantiated assertion, and therefore not knowledge.

However, Edmund Gettier created multiple counter-examples that prevent the Tripartite View from constituting knowledge. His first counter-example is as follows: Smith and Jones are both applying for the same job. Smith overhears the boss saying that Jones will get the job, and subsequently sees Jones count out ten coins from his pocket. He therefore forms the belief that ‘the man with ten coins in his pocket will get the job’. However, Smith gets the job, and finds that he too has ten coins in his pocket. Therefore his belief is true (the man who gets the job has ten coins in his pocket), he believes it, and it is justified (because he heard the boss talking). Under JTB, we would have to say that Smith has knowledge. However, this seems counter-intuitive - Smith only has knowledge by sheer coincidence, and the ramifications of allowing this sort of knowledge would be widespread. We therefore conclude that we must find an alternative definition of knowledge that prevents cases of lucky true belief, because Gettier’s case shows that it is clearly flawed in its definition.
</br>

### Explain how an account of epistemic virtue can be used to show why Smith lacks knowledge in one of Gettier’s original counter-examples

Edmund Gettier created multiple counter-examples that demonstrate how someone can have lucky true belief under the tripartite view (i.e. that knowledge must be true, believed, and justified). It is the aim of all subsequent definitions of knowledge to overcome these cases. Gettier’s first case runs as follows: Smith and Jones are both applying for the same job. Smith overhears the boss saying that Jones will get the job, and subsequently sees Jones count out ten coins from his pocket. He therefore forms the belief that ‘the man with ten coins in his pocket will get the job’. However, Smith gets the job, and finds that he too has ten coins in his pocket. Therefore his belief is true (the man who gets the job has ten coins in his pocket), he believes it, and it is justified (because he heard the boss talking). Under the tripartite view, he can be said to have knowledge. However, because this is clearly flawed (coincidental knowledge is highly counterintuitive), we must find another definition of knowledge. both Zagzebski and Sosa promote their own versions of epistemic virtue as a definition of knowledge, both of which are able to overcome Gettier’s counter-example.

Linda Zagzebski’s form of Virtue Epistemology (henceforth, ‘VE’) claims that knowledge can be defined as a belief that arises out of an act of intellectual virtue. Here, an intellectual virtue is similar to Aristotle’s form: it is a virtue that motivates us to find truth, and is successful in doing so. Zagzebski argues that all Gettier cases arise from a gap between truth and the third condition (i.e. justification). Her form of VE bridges this gap - it links truth and justification, because a belief must arise from an intellectual virtue, rather than simply being completely justified, formed from a reliable cognitive process, etc. It can therefore overcome Gettier cases - in the case explained above, Smith would not have knowledge, because his belief that ‘the man with ten coins in his pocket will get the job’ does not arise from an act of intellectual virtue. Ernest Sosa also presents his own form of VE. He argues that knowledge is constituted of three conditions: Accuracy (Is the belief true?), Adroitness (Does the believer possess intellectual virtues?), and Aptness (Is the belief true as a result of the agent using intellectual virtues). Again, this bridges the truth-gap, perhaps even more clearly than Zagzebski’s form of VE; and when applied to the case of Smith and Jones, it again prevents Smith from possessing knowledge, because his belief is not true as a result of his use of intellectual virtue, and is therefore not apt, even if it is accurate and adroit. Therefore, it can clearly be seen that VE overcomes Gettier’s original counter-examples.

</br>

## Perception

</br>

### Briefly explain Direct Realism and explain how the argument from hallucination can be used to argue against this view

Direct Realism is the claim that the mind-independent external world is the cause of our perceptions, and we perceive it exactly as it is. For example, if I were to look at the desk in front of me, then the Direct Realist would argue that this is an accurate representation of the mind-independent physical object that is the desk. Direct Realism makes the claim that there is no difference between our perception (e.g. sight, sensation, smell, etc.) and what exists in the world. However, this lack of distinction opens the theory up to attacks from multiple angles. One of these arguments is that from hallucination.

The argument from hallucination posits that, because Direct Realism does not distinguish between the content of our perceptions and what exists in the mind-independent external world, any hallucinations that we may experience must be a part of the external world. Say, for example, that due to a mental disorder I were experiencing hallucinations of unicorns prancing around the room. Obviously, one may conclude that these unicorns are not really in the room, because unicorns do not exist. However, because Direct Realism claims that we perceive everything directly, the Direct Realist is forced to claim that the unicorns really exist in the room. This is an absurd claim. The argument from hallucination can be argued to be grounds for discounting Direct Realism as a theory, because it equates hallucinations with reality.

</br>

### Outline Indirect realism and explain Locke’s responses to the claim that Indirect Realism leads to scepticism

Indirect Realism is the claim that we perceive a mind-independent external world indirectly, through sense-data. Sense-data, says that Indirect Realist, is the immediate concept of our perception. It is private, and is fleeting and variable. The existence of sense-data allows for subjective experience, overcoming the objection from perceptual variation that Direct Realism faces. It is argued that sense-data represents the mind-independent external world, but may not be a perfectly accurate representation. Indirect Realism relies on Locke’s distinction between primary and secondary qualities: primary qualities are those which do not change circumstantially, such as size, shape (here, shape means molecular structure), etc. Secondary qualities are those which change depending on perspective, such as colour, temperature, etc. This distinction is important because Locke argues that it allows our sense-data to change. The claim that all of our perceptions consist of sense-data presents an issue for Indirect Realism, however - it leads to a ‘veil of perception’ and scepticism about the existence of the external world. If we cannot directly perceive the external world, then it can be questioned how we know that it exists - after all, an evil demon could be interfering with our sense-data, causing us to perceive a fake reality. A mind-independent reality may not exist.

Locke argues against this objection in multiple ways. Firstly, he argues that we can prove the existence of an external world through coherence: if I see a fire, and doubt that it is actually there, I can put my hand close to the fire and feel its warmth, smell the smoke, etc. and conclude that there is indeed a fire in this place. Locke also argues that our perceptions are involuntary - if we go outside on a sunny day with our eyes closed, then when we open them we cannot help but perceive the sun. This means that we are not the cause of our perceptions, because if we were, we could control them, and we cannot. There must be another cause of our perceptions, and Locke argues that this cause is the external world. Arguing in this way, Locke argues against scepticism caused by a veil of perception.

</br>

