# Global Scepticism 25 Marker (Rewritten)


Global scepticism is the view that we are not able to trust or rely on any of our knowledge or our perceptions, because we have reason for doubt. There are various responses which attempt to ascertain a basic level of knowledge that we can know to be true: Descartes argues for the existence of God as knowledge that we cannot doubt; Reliabilism can claim that we cannot doubt things that can be realised through a reliable cognitive process; and Russell claims that the existence of the external world is the best hypothesis. This essay shall argue that Reliabilism is the most successful in attempting to defeat global scepticism when taken relatively, but ultimately fails to defeat scepticism in its entirety, as it still leaves open the possibility that we can doubt our experiences, despite our perception being argued to be a reliable method of forming true beliefs (and therefore allowing us to have knowledge of the external world). Thus, the essay shall conclude that there are no arguments which successfully defeat global scepticism in its entirety.

Descartes forms his concept of global scepticism in his ‘three waves of doubt’. The first wave is the argument that we can doubt our knowledge through illusion, the second that we can doubt our knowledge because of dreams. The third wave of doubt forms global scepticism. It is the argument that we can doubt our knowledge because the possibility exists that we are being perpetually deceived by an evil demon, whose sole intent is to make us believe things that are not actually true. If his theory is correct, then we cannot know anything, because everything that we perceive is a deliberate deception. To overcome global scepticism, we must provide a response that either rules out the possibility of the existence of an evil demon, or establishes a form of knowledge which cannot be doubted. Descartes argues that if we can establish this knowledge, then scepticism, at least globally, can be defeated. One of the types of knowledge that he attempts to establish is proof of the existence of God - if His existence can be proven, then we can argue that God would not allow us to be deceived, and therefore global scepticism can be overcome.

Descartes’ Trademark argument runs as follows: I have the concept of God, the concept of something both infinite and possessing all perfections. As a mind (a claim which Descartes has allegedly established through his cogito), I can create many ideas, such as of people and physical objects. I am finite, whereas the concept of God is infinite. Because the cause of this concept must have as much reality as the concept itself, I could not have created this concept - I am not infinite. The only being that has as much reality as the concept of God is God Himself, and therefore he must be the cause of my concept of God. Therefore, if He is the cause of my concept, His existence is necessary to cause this concept - thus, God exists. If God exists, then because He possesses all perfections, he would not allow us to be deceived. If this is correct, then the ‘evil demon’ would not be able to deceive us, and so Descartes’ 'Third Wave of Doubt' and the possibility of global deception and scepticism would be impossible. However, there are arguments to say that this is not a correct argument. For one, Descartes is argued to be mistaken about the nature of causation: if we apply Hume’s fork to his trademark argument, then we may argue that, contrary to Descartes belief, not every concept must have a cause. The statement that ‘some things do not have a cause’ does not cause a contradiction (as the statement ‘a married bachelor’ does), and therefore the statement that ‘everything has a cause’ is not analytically true, nor is it a matter of fact - it can be denied coherently. Whilst this belief may result from our experience, this only makes it contingently true, because it still may be false. We cannot show that everything has a cause without exception. Furthermore, if we cannot know that everything has a cause, then neither can we prove that the cause of a concept must have as much reality as the concept itself. If we cannot prove either of these claims, then the premises of the Trademark argument cannot be proved, and thus, it cannot hold - the argument relies entirely on Descartes’ understanding of causation, and if this is disproven, as above, then it falls apart. If the Trademark argument does not succeed, then Descartes has failed to prove the existence of God. If God does not exist, then there is nothing to protect us from scepticism. This means that Descartes argument that a perfect God would not allow us to be deceived by an evil demon does not hold, as God may not exist, and thus cannot protect us. As a result, it can be concluded that the possibility of our being deceived still exists, and Descartes’ Trademark argument for the existence of God does not overcome global scepticism. 

In the face of Descartes’ failure, we must turn to another theory to overcome global scepticism, namely Russell’s argument that the existence of the external world is the best hypothesis. It should be noted here that Descartes is a rationalist, and thus attempts to overcome global scepticism by using a deductive a priori argument. Russell, however, is an empiricist, arguing from the standpoint that all of our knowledge is a posteriori and comes from experience. Russell argues that out of these two statements - “the external world does not exist and is not the cause of my perceptions”; and “the external world exists and is the cause of my perceptions” - the latter is the most plausible, and so should be accepted as the ‘best hypothesis’. He accepts that we cannot know whether the external world exists *for certain*, thus allowing some element of scepticism, but suggests that its existence corresponds to our experience and is therefore the *best* hypothesis that we can come up with. Russell uses the example of a cat to illustrate this: if we are looking at a cat sitting on a sofa, and we turn away, and when we turn back it is on the floor, there are two possible explanations: either the cat stopped existing when we turned away, and began existing in a different place when we looked back; or the cat moved from the sofa to the floor through a series of intermediary positions. Russell argues that the latter is the most plausible, and this is the statement that supports the existence of the external world. 

However, we can object to Russell’s argument by arguing that it remains a hypothesis. We have not established whether the external world *actually* exists, but it is just the most likely scenario. This is a significant weakness, because the evil demon *could* still be deceiving us. We have no way of knowing. Furthermore, we can argue that, if we were being deceived, the two statements about whether the external world exists could be equally likely, and we again have no way of knowing this *because we are being deceived*. The empirical nature of Russell’s argument means that we can argue that it is possible that the evil demon is still deceiving us about the nature of our perception, because our experience is both the thing being deceived and the thing that Russell appeals to in his argument. If this objection holds, and it seems to, then we must concede that Russell’s argument fails in overcoming global scepticism, because very argument that attempts to overcome scepticism is itself subject to it.

Thus far, both arguments that have been intended to overcome global scepticism have failed through counter-argument, Reliabilism also posits a theory in order to disprove global scepticism, arguing that we can gain knowledge through the use of reliable cognitive processes. Take the statement ‘I have hands’, for example. If I am a brain in a vat, then I do not have hands. But if I am not, then I can prove that I do have hands by appealing to my vision being a reliable cognitive process (i.e. a process which tends to produce a high proportion of true beliefs). We do not need to know whether or not we are being deceived: if we are not, then we can still form true beliefs through reliable cognitive processes. In short, we can know a proposition without *knowing* that we know a proposition. We can make an objection to this argument: if I am a brain in a vat, then my cognitive processes are unreliable, and I cannot trust them to form true beliefs - even the Reliabilist would agree with this. This objection is limited, however, because the reliabilist can easily respond by reasserting their prior claims, i.e. that there is a difference between *knowing that* and *knowing that I know that*. Therefore, it can be argued that Reliabilism successfully defeats scepticism, because it knocks down the main criticism made against it and seems to allow us knowledge in the face of doubt.

We may therefore conclude that, because Descartes’ attempt to establish the existence of God via the trademark argument, and Russell’s attempt to establish the existence of the external world as the ‘best hypothesis’ both fail in light of various criticisms, the argument that the Reliabilist puts forth is the most successful, and its overcoming of the criticisms put to it allow it to be concluded that it is able to overcome global scepticism, meaning that we *can* have knowledge.