# Metaphysics of God 25 Mark Questions


## Is the concept of God coherent?

Whether the concept of God is coherent is a subject of debate amongst philosophers. This essay shall argue that the concept of God is coherent both because it is not a limit on God’s power for him to be unable to perform the logically impossible, and because God’s manipulation of morality is motivated by other factors.

The (Judeo-Christian) concept of God can be established by three main characteristics. Firstly, God is omnipotent - he is all-powerful, and able to perform any action. God is also omniscient, i.e. he is all knowing. Further, God is omnibenevolent, which means that he is all loving. The removal of any of these from the concept of God must cause us to conclude that the concept is incoherent. It must also be noted that there is some debate over a fourth characteristic of God, namely whether God is everlasting or eternal. If God is everlasting, then he is a temporal being, existing within time - he saw the start of the universe and will continue to exist forever. However, if God is eternal, then he exists outside of time and is atemporal. This distinction is important to understand, as arguments below depend on it for their plausibility. Stump and Kretzmann argue that God is E-simultaneous, and perceives all moments in time *simultaneously.* It 

One argument that is proposed as an argument against the coherence of God is the paradox of the stone. The paradox asks the question ‘can God create a stone which he cannot lift’. The paradox manifests in the fact that there are two answers to this question, neither of which results in a coherent concept of God: either God can create the stone, but cannot lift it; or God cannot create the stone. Either of these answers prevents one from arguing that God is omnipotent, because the inability to lift the stone and an inability to create the stone both place a limit on God’s power. If this paradox cannot be disproven, then it breaks down the coherence of the concept of God. In order to maintain the integrity of this concept, we can object to the paradox: the concept of a stone which God cannot lift is a contradiction - it is logically impossible - and because we can define God’s omnipotence as absolute power within logical limits, the inability to lift a stone which, by definition, God cannot lift, does not place any limit on God’s power - he is capable of anything which is logically possible. We can therefore conclude that the paradox of the stone fails to undermine God’s omnipotence, and the concept of God remains coherent.

Another argument against the concept of God, the problem of interaction between omniscience and free will, faces a similar issue. The argument is as follows: if God is omniscient, then he knows what we are going to do at any given moment - as previously mentioned, God is E-simultaneous, and as such sees all moments in time simultaneously. This would seem to contradict the concept of free will, because it implies that our choices are predetermined. Therefore, a dilemma arises: either God is omniscient, and we do not have free will; or we have free will, and God is therefore not omniscient. If the latter is true, then the concept of God becomes incoherent. However, we can again object from a logical impossibility. We can argue that it is impossible to know the future, and therefore, as previously, God’s omniscience is not limited by not being able to see into the future. This both preserves our free will and maintains the coherence of the concept of God. It must be taken into consideration, however, that this objection only succeeds if we take God to be everlasting - if he is eternal, then by definition he can see into the future, and it is not a logical impossibility. Despite this, we can still argue that the concept of God remains coherent, because God’s omniscience and free will are still compatible.

The Euthyphro dilemma also presents an argument against the coherence of the concept of God. The Euthyphro dilemma presents a quandary between two options about God and his command of morality. Take a statement such as ‘killing babies is wrong’. Either a) God makes killing babies wrong; or b) God commands that killing babies is wrong because it wrong by moral standards. If God makes killing babies wrong, then we can argue that he creates morality. In this case, God’s omnibenevolence is entirely arbitrary, because omnibenevolence is based on God’s own moral st/andards - the statement ‘God is good’ is a tautology. On the other hands, God must be said to follow morality, which would make his omnipotence questionable, because he is subject to external factors which he does not control. In either scenario, a part of the concept of God is proven to be different to our conception of it, and therefore the concept is not coherent. However, we can object to this argument by arguing that God’s control of morality does not make his omnibenevolence arbitrary, for He does not manipulate morality arbitrarily - rather, He creates morality depending on other factors, such as love. Therefore, he could will it that 'killing babies is wrong', because people love their babies and this would violate this love. This response is sound, and so we may conclude that the concept of God remains protected from this argument.

In conclusion, despite attacks from multiple angles, the coherence of the concept of God remains unscathed. God’s characteristics are bounded by logical possibility, which allows us to refute the paradox of the stone and the conflict between omniscience and free will; and God’s use of other factors to inform his choices about morality shows that his omnibenevolence is not arbitrary. Thus, all arguments fail, and we can conclude that the concept of God remains entirely coherent.