# Moral Philosophy 12 Mark Questions

</br>

## Utilitarianism
</br>

### Explain hedonistic utilitarianism and explain the criticism that it ignores the moral integrity of the individual.

First formulated by Jeremy Bentham, hedonistic utilitarianism is an ethical theory which claims that, in making moral decisions, we should adhere to the ‘utility principle’, which states that we should choose the course of action which maximises the greatest happiness for the greatest number. Here, happiness is defined as ‘pleasure, and the absence of pain’. There are various forms of hedonistic utilitarianism. The simplest form is Bentham’s. His argument is based on the utility principle and his felicific calculus. This is a system which allows us to work out the pleasure produced by our actions. It takes into account seven factors: fecundity, extent, intensity, purity, duration, certainty, and propinquity. Bentham states that we can use these factors to calculate the pleasure or pain that each of our actions produces, and the action which produces the most pleasure and least pain is the morally correct course of action.

Mill, building upon Bentham, develops his own form of Utilitarianism, qualitative rather than quantitative. He argues that there are two types of pleasure: higher and lower. Higher pleasures are those associated with intellectual and emotional pursuits, whereas lower pleasures are those associated with more ‘primal’ activities, such as sexual pleasure or eating. Mill says that we can distinguish between the two by using a ‘test of competent judges’, i.e. asking those who have experienced both types of pleasure, and determining which is ‘higher’ by what they prefer. Mill highlights that someone can engage in a lower pleasure, but still prefer the higher pleasure, understanding the choice that they have made.

Both of these forms of Utilitarianism appeal to the utility principle, and this allows us to object that they both entirely ignore the moral importance of integrity and of the values that we hold. A good example of this objection is that of George and the chemical lab, which runs as follows: George has just completed a PHD in chemistry, and is now searching for a job. The job search is causing a lot of emotional distress to his wife and children. It is suggested to him that he apply for a job in a lab which researches and develops chemical weaponry. However, George is strongly against the use of chemical weapons, and has moral scruples about taking the job because it conflicts with his values. But he realises that if he does not take the job, then someone else will take it, someone who will be more enthusiastic towards it and develop chemical weapons faster, causing significantly more damage to the world. So, the question asked of Utilitarianism is ‘should George take the job?’.

Utilitarianism must answer ‘yes’, even though it conflicts with his moral values. By taking the job, George will prevent the stress placed on his family and himself, and prevent the expedient development of chemical weaponry (by slowing it down due to his lack of enthusiasm). Because this course of action will produce the most pleasure and reduce pain the most, compared to the other option, it is the choice that Utilitarianism must advocate for. But, we can object, our moral integrity is very important to us in making the decisions that we do. Vegetarians who feel that it is morally wrong to eat meat usually will not do so even if pressured because it conflicts with their values. There is something of moral significance in our integrity and moral values which Utilitarianism misses out of its theory, and so in this form, it cannot hold.

</br>

### Explain Bentham’s utilitarianism and explain how Nozick’s experience machine challenges this view.

Jeremy Bentham’s proposed Utilitarianism, an ethical theory based on the ‘utility principle’, i.e. that we should choose the course of action which brings about the greatest happiness for the greatest number. (happiness is here defined as ‘pleasure and the absence of pain). He argues that we can calculate the pleasure that our actions produce through a ‘felicific calculus’, consisting of seven factors relating to pleasure: propinquity, certainty, extent, intensity, fecundity, purity, and duration. From these, we can calculate which action produces the largest amount of net pleasure (the most pleasure and least pain), and thus determine which action is the morally correct course of action. This is a very simplistic theory, and Robert Nozick argues that its simplicity in defining pleasure is a major flaw.

Nozick proposes the thought-experiment of an ‘experience machine’. This is a virtual reality machine, in which, if plugged in, a human is able to experience a life full of many pleasures, very few pains, and the experience of many achievements. The subject will not know that they are plugged into the machine, and will believe that this simulated existence is completely real. However, they must choose to plug in forever, or not at all. Nozick’s argument here is that most of us would choose not to plug in. This is because, he argues, we value something different to pleasure, namely being in contact with reality. Despite the experience machine producing the maximum amount of pleasure and the minimum amount of pain for the individual that is plugged in, Nozick says that we ‘prefer’ a real experience, even if it results in less pleasure and more pain. Therefore, he argues, rather than aiming solely to maximise pleasure and minimise pain as Bentham proposes, we should aim to maximise people’s preferences, such as being in contact with reality. This is the basis of ‘preference utilitarianism’, and counters Bentham’s form of utilitarianism, making his point moot.