# Moral Philosophy 25 Mark Questions

</br>

### Assess Kant’s deontological ethics

Kantian deontological ethics, whilst it has its merits, is a fundamentally flawed account of what makes actions morally right or wrong. This essay will take this line of argument, concluding that Kantian deontology inevitably fails as a theory of morality.

Kant provides a deontological theory - it is entirely non-consequentialist. Kant bases his form of deontology on two formulations of what he calls the ‘categorical imperative’. The first formulation of this imperative is that we must “act only on that maxim which at the same time you can will to be universalised”. In other words, we should choose the course of action which we would want everyone else to follow. Kant argues that there are two situations in which a ‘maxim’ (a principle such as ‘not to steal’ or ‘not to kill’) cannot be universalised. The first is a contradiction in conception, which is when a maxim cannot be universalised because to do so would cancel out the maxim. Take stealing, for example. If one were to act on the maxim ‘to steal what I want, when I want it’, and will it to be universal, then everyone would steal whenever they wanted. However, if everyone did this, then the concept of private property would cease to exist entirely, and since the concept of stealing depends on the concept of private property, stealing would no longer be possible - hence, a contradiction in conception. The second situation in which a maxim cannot be universalised is a contradiction in will. To illustrate this, take the example of the maxim ‘to never provide help to anyone’. We cannot rationally will this, because if we did, then we would never be able to get help when we needed it, and so willing this would defeat our own ends. These two scenarios prevent a maxim from being universalised. If a maxim is universalisable, then Kant argues that we have a perfect duty to act on it, i.e. we must always act on it no matter the circumstances or the consequences.

We can object to Kant’s theory that we can ‘bypass’ contradictions in conception by formulating specific maxims. Say, for example, instead of the maxim ‘to steal what I want, when I want’, we formulated the maxim ‘to steal from market stalls selling novelty umbrellas on Wednesdays’. This maxim is so specific that it can be universalised without negating the concept of stealing as a whole - there are few circumstances in which it occurs. This would seem to allow us to formulate specific maxims in order to avoid violating the categorical imperative, and so Kantian deontology seems to allow actions such as stealing which we would naturally class as morally wrong. Kant’s response to this is that we must be honest about our intentions when formulating our maxims. The underlying intention of the aforementioned specific maxim is actually still ‘to steal what I want, when I want’. This maxim is, as we have already established, not universalisable, and so such specific maxims still violate the categorical imperative. However, we can object to Kant further: we can formulate honest maxims that are ‘morally wrong’ but still universalisable and do not create a contradiction in conception. For example, we can formulate the maxim ‘to steal to save a life’ - the intention behind this is honest, and it can be universalised because it does not contradict itself. Therefore, despite Kant’s defence, we can still argue that Kantian deontology allows actions that we would consider morally wrong, which is a damaging criticism, weakening the legitimacy of deontology as a theory.

We may also object to Kantian deontology that it ignores consequences and utility. Kant would argue that, even if it means saving someone’s life, we should not tell a lie. This seems slightly absurd - if a murderer came to our door demanding that we tell them where a fugitive is (he’s hiding in our basement), then Kant would argue that we should tell the murderer where the fugitive is, even though this will lead to the fugitive’s death. We can argue that the consequences of our actions should matter. Kant’s response to this is that the only good thing without qualification is the good will. Consequences are not good without qualification, and so they must be placed below duty and the good will in terms of priority. We should always act according to the good will, rather than try to anticipate the consequences of our actions. If we attempt to anticipate the consequences of our actions, then this may lead to undesirable outcomes: lying to the murderer that the fugitive is next door may seem like the right course of action to one who believes that the fugitive is indeed in their basement - but if the fugitive has slipped out the back door and jumped the fence to next door, then our lie will have led the murderer to them. Kant argues that, despite the best of intentions, we are responsible for their death. Acting on the maxim ‘not to lie’ absolves us of this responsibility. However we may object further: surely there are other values besides the good will that are morally important? Say that you had a friend in the hospital. If you go to visit them because you are genuinely worried and care for them, then Kant would say that this is not morally correct, because you are acting out of something other than duty. However, if you go to visit them purely motivated out of duty, then this is morally good. So it would seem that Kantian deontology entirely ignores the value of other motivations - surely acting out of love and care is morally good? This causes us to conclude that Kantian deontology cannot hold.

In conclusion, the objections presented to Kantian deontology that we can formulate specific maxims to overcome violation of the categorical imperative, and that it ignores the value of consequences, cause it to fail entirely. An ethical theory which allows for morally wrong actions and exceptions to its rules cannot possibly be correct, nor can it be correct if it ignores motives which we might hold as morally valuable. Therefore, Kantian deontology is not the correct ethical theory.