# Practise Paper 1

</br>

### Briefly explain how the infallibilist defines knowledge (3)

The infallibilist argues that we have knowledge if and only if S’ belief, P, is true; S believes that P; and P is guaranteed to be true (i.e. we have certainty of its truth).

</br>

### Explain how Russel respond to philosophical scepticism (5)

Philosophical scepticism posits that we cannot know that the external world actually exists. Russell argues in response that the existence of the external world is the best hypothesis. He argues that there are two options about the existence of the external world: either 1) the external world does not exist, and our perceptions arise from another cause - the evil demon’s deception, perhaps; or 2) the external world does exist, and is the cause of our perception. Russell argues that the latter makes more logical sense and is more likely, and is therefore the best hypothesis. Whilst Russell doesn’t necessarily prove that the external world exists, he does provide good grounds for its existence being the most likely scenario.

</br>

### Explain how the time lag argument presents a challenge for direct realism (5)

Direct Realism claims that there is a mind-independent external world, and that we perceive it directly, i.e. exactly as it is. However, the argument from time-lag gives an example which Direct Realism seemingly cannot explain. Take, for example, the sun. Light from the sun takes approximately eight minutes to reach our eyes on earth. Therefore, argues the critic of Direct Realism, we do not perceive the sun directly, because we perceive it through the medium of light waves, and thus indirectly. This is an extreme example, but it can be scaled down and applied to all of our perceptions - in looking at a table there is a time-lag between its reflection of the light and my perception of it; the same applies to sound: thunder a good example of this, as there is a lag between lightning and the thunder due to the speed of sound. Therefore, there is a time-lag between the event occurring and our perception of it, even if this lag is miniscule, and so it cannot be argued that we perceive the mind-independent external world directly.

</br>

### Outline Berkeley’s idealism and the issues it faces from illusion and hallucination

Berkeley posits a theory of perception which claims that there is no mind-independent external world, and our perceptions are simply copies of God’s ideas. He comes to this conclusion first through attacking Locke’s primary/secondary quality distinction, then by arguing for his ‘master argument’, and finally concluding that the source of our perception is God. His attack on the primary/secondary quality distinction is as follows: primary qualities are those which do not change depending on circumstances, such as molecular structure (shape) and size. Secondary qualities are ‘fleeting and variable’, changing depending on perspective, such as temperature, colour, etc. Berkeley agrees with Locke that secondary qualities are mind-dependent, because they are dependent on circumstances. However, he disagrees with Locke in that he argues that primary qualities are also mind-dependent. He argues, for example, that perceived size can change as we move closer or further away from an object, and that what looks small to me might look huge to an ant. He therefore concludes that primary and secondary qualities are mind-dependent. Because he agrees with Locke that our perception is comprised solely of these qualities, he is able to argue, therefore, that the entire content of our perception is mind-dependent. This is the basis for his form of idealism. Berkeley then goes on to posit his ‘master argument’: he asks the question ‘can one conceive of a mind-independent tree?’. The answer, he argues, is no, because as soon as one conceives of such a thing, it becomes mind-dependent, and therefore we have no evidence that the mind-independent external world exists, and Berkeley argues that this proves that the content of our perception is wholly mind-dependent. Berkeley then goes on to clarify the cause of our perceptions, that he argues to be God. He claims that our perceptions are either caused by ideas within our minds, or an external cause. Ideas cannot be the cause of our perception, because they are passive and cannot be responsible for causation. He therefore concludes that the cause of our perception must be external. Another mind must cause our perceptions. He argues that he has the concept of God, and therefore the cause of his perceptions and ideas must also have the concept of God. He claims that the cause of this idea must have as much reality of the idea itself, and so the only possible cause that could have as much reality as the concept of God is God himself. He goes on to clarify that our perceptions our copies of things in God’s understanding. This conception of Berkeley’s theory makes no distinction between appearance and reality, and this is the basis of the following arguments from illusion and hallucination.

Because Idealism makes no distinction between appearance and reality, it suffers from the same issues as Direct Realism. Take illusion: if we were to look at a pencil in water, it would appear to be crooked. We know, of course, that this is as a result of refraction, but Idealism, claiming that appearance and reality are one and the same, must argue that the pencil is indeed crooked (or at least the idea of the pencil in our perception is crooked). This seems absurd. The argument from hallucination takes a similar line of argument: if I were to hallucinate a unicorn, believing that it really existed right in front of me, then idealism would have to claim the same, as there is no difference between my hallucination and reality. Again, this seems absurd. Therefore, the arguments from hallucination and illusion can be shown to be a major issue for idealism: it would seem that Idealism claims that the deception of our senses is not deception at all, but we know this not to be the case.

</br>

### Is there a satisfactory definition of knowledge?

Whether there is a satisfactory definition of knowledge is one of the main points of contention in the field of epistemology. This essay shall answer this question, concluding that Virtue Epistemology is the best definition of knowledge, because it is able to overcome Gettier counterexamples, unlike most other theories of knowledge.

The Platonic definition of knowledge is Justified True Belief (JTB). This argues that one has knowledge if, and only if: some proposition, P, is true; S (the agent) believes that P; and S’s belief that P is justified. This was, for centuries, the accepted philosophical definition of knowledge. However, Edmund Gettier proposed a counterexample which he argued disproved JTB. Said counterexample runs as follows: Smith and Jones are applying for the same job. Smith overhears the boss saying that Jones will get the job. Afterwards, he watches Jones count out ten coins from his pocket. He thus forms the belief that ‘the man with ten coins in his pocket will get the job’. However, Smith ends up getting the job, and coincidentally finds that he too has ten coins in his pocket. This, Gettier says is an example where JTB fits, but we wouldn’t want to grant Smith knowledge: Smith’s belief is true (the man with 10 coins in his pocket got the job); he believes it; and it is justified (because he overheard the boss)l; but it would be absurd to argue that Smith has knowledge in this scenario. Therefore, Gettier argues that we must find another definition of knowledge that is able to overcome situations such as this where knowledge arises by coincidence. One such definition is No False Lemmas.

No False Lemmas is the theory that one has knowledge if and only if: P is true; S believes that P; and S’ belief that P did not arise from a false lemma (i.e. was not inferred from another premise in the argument). This is a strengthening of the justification condition, and seems to solve Gettier’s original counter-example straight away: Smith would not have knowledge, because his belief that ‘the man with ten coins in his pocket will get the job’ arises from the false lemma that Jones will get the job, and so the third condition is not satisfied. Under Gettier’s condition, this is a satisfactory definition of knowledge. However, Linda Zagzebski argues otherwise: she presents the example of ‘Dr Jones and the Virus’, which runs as follows: Dr Jones has a patient, Smith, who is presenting with symptoms of Virus X. She does tests on Smith, and from the test results concludes that Smith does indeed have Virus X. She therefore forms the belief that ‘Smith has Virus X’. However, the symptoms and test results are actually caused by an undiscovered Virus, Virus Y, which is functionally identical to Virus X in terms of its effects and showing up on tests. But, after the tests have been taken, Smith contracts Virus X. Therefore, Dr Jones’ belief that ‘Smith has Virus X’ satisfies all conditions of No False Lemmas: it is true (Smith does have Virus X); she believes it; and it has arisen from test results and symptoms, neither of which count as a false lemma. But we would still want to deny Dr Jones knowledge. Thus, despite overcoming Gettier’s original counterexample, we cannot argue that No False Lemmas is any improvement, because it succumbs to a similar scenario of accidental/coincidental knowledge. To overcome this, we may try and strengthen justification (the third condition) further.

To strengthen the third condition of justification further, we can adopt infallibilism as a theory of knowledge. Infallibilism claims that we have knowledge if, and only if: P is true; S believes that P; and S’ justification for believing that P is to a point of absolute certainty. We can come to this conclusion through the following line of argument: no one can know what is false; therefore, if S knows that P, then they cannot be mistaken about P. This leads to the conclusion that, for justification to secure knowledge, it must be infallible. Thus, if S is justified in believing that P, then S cannot possibly be mistaken. So, if it is possible that S is mistaken, then S cannot be justified in believing that P; therefore, Infallibilism is correct. This would seem to overcome both Gettier’s original counterexample *and* Zagzebski’s ‘Dr Jones’ example: neither person has absolute certainty that their belief is accurate, and so their belief does not fall under the infallibilist definition of knowledge. However, there are multiple objections that we can make to infallibilism, which bring its definition into doubt. The first is that it can be accused of committing the fallacy of equivocation: it equates a ‘could be mistaken’ statement with an ‘is mistaken’ statement, which are not the same thing. Thus, the argument for infallibilism can be refuted. Furthermore, the implications of infallibilism is that it is very restrictive. It is incredibly rare that we have enough certainty to guarantee justification, and so infallibilism limits us to very little knowledge. This does not seem to fit any definition of knowledge as we understand it, and so it cannot be said to be at all satisfactory in defining knowledge.

Zagzebski argues that the previous two definitions of knowledge fail because of a common flaw: they both cause a ‘truth-gap’ between truth and the third condition (i.e. justification of varying strength). This is to say that there is no link between truth and justification, and this is the gap that Gettier cases and other counterexamples are able to exploit in order to disprove various definitions of knowledge. In response to this revelation, both Zagzebski and Ernest Sosa present their own definitions of knowledge, in the form of Virtue Epistemology. A brief explanation of ‘intellectual virtue’ is required here: Virtue Epistemology assumes Aristotle’s definition of virtue, and argues that an ‘intellectual virtue’ is a virtue which motivates the agent to find truth, and is successful in doing so. An ‘act of intellectual virtue’, therefore, is an act which is motivated by intellectual virtue and succeeds in ascertaining truth. Zagzebksi argues that S has knowledge if, and only if: P is true; S believes that P; and S’ belief that P arises from an act of intellectual virtue. Not only does this definition overcome various Gettier cases, but it also bridges the ‘truth-gap’ that Zagzebski argues is the cause of the downfall of other definitions of knowledge. It successfully links the truth of a statement to justification by intellectual virtue. Ernest Sosa builds upon this definition, proposing his own criteria knowledge along similar lines - his ‘Triple A’./ 