## There is progress in science. Is there progress in philosophy, and is the field only successful if there is?


In _Problems of Philosophy_, Bertrand Russell writes that “it cannot be maintained that philosophy has had any very great measure of success in its attempts to provide definite answers to its questions” (%%@russellProblemsPhilosophy1912 %%1912). Indeed, the work of Aristotle, Plato and their contemporaries are still subject to much debate even today. Those who disparage the field of philosophy often put forth the argument that philosophy is somewhat pointless because its scholars can never seem to come to an agreement over any branch of the field. To some extent, this is true, as Russell acknowledges. A contrast between philosophy and science is often drawn: in a relatively short span of time, science has provided seemingly definite answers to the questions that the human race has pondered upon for millennia, whereas philosophy seems, to the untrained eye, to have made little progress. Russell states that “this is partly accounted for by the fact that, as soon as definite knowledge concerning any subject becomes possible, this subject ceases to be called philosophy, and becomes a separate science (ibid.). This is certainly true for fields such as Psychology, which up until relatively recently was a philosophical endeavour instead of a scientific one. The question that therefore stands before us is that of whether Philosophy can make progress, and whether it is only successful if it can.

We must first ask ourselves how we should define ‘progress’. Gerber asserts that there are two options: '“specific cases in which one philosophical proposition has been objectively shown to be better than another” or “the totality of philosophical propositions which are believed and defended in one era are objectively better than the totality of philosophical propositions believed and defended in an earlier era - or perhaps in all earlier eras” (%% @gerberThereProgressPhilosophy1973 %%1973). Examples of the former, Gerber says, are few and far between, but they do still exist. Such an example is present in the case of Hume’s analysis of causation. Having built upon Aristotle’s causal theory, it would be remiss of any self-respecting student of philosophy not to take Hume’s theory into account in a discussion on the subject. Hume demonstrated difficulties with the topic that are essential to our understanding of it, and Aristotle’s account alone would not suffice. Additionally, Edmund Gettier’s counter-examples to certain theories of knowledge are another example. Few object to these counter-examples, and the tripartite view of knowledge as justified true belief is no longer accepted. We can certainly call these examples progress. The latter definition of progress, in which philosophical propositions from one era are objectively better than the propositions which preceded it, is a very difficult definition to qualify. It is nigh on impossible to guarantee that current views are better than preceding ones. 

Wilfred Sellars’ view develops on the latter definition. He states that “the historical development of philosophy is more truly conceived as the periodic formulation of new questions” (%% @feiglReadingPhilosophicalAnalysis1949 %%1949). Simply put, understanding of the questions that we ask develops in such a way that the original question is no longer sufficient, and we are forced to formulate a new enquiry. These new questions, in theory, bring us closer to the truth. When we analyse the fundamentals of Philosophy, this is what we find. The purpose of Philosophy is to edge ever nearer to the truth. So, this is the question that we may now answer. Does Philosophy ever bring us closer to the truth, without the development of a separate study?

The Unreliability Thesis states that “Philosophers are unreliable at arriving at true philosophical beliefs about the big questions” (Lougheed, %% @lougheedDisagreementDeepTime2019 %%2019, p. 286). If this thesis is to be believed, then there seems to be very little progress in Philosophy, at least in terms of coming closer to the truth. It is a widely supported view (Trascendental Naturalism encompasses this view (McGinn, %% @mcginnProblemsPhilosophyLimits1993 %%1993), as does the account of Brennan when writing on Meta-philosophical scepticism (%% @brennanScepticismPhilosophy2010 %%2010)). The thesis argues that philosophical methods are often inaccurate, and “leads experts with the highest degree of epistemic virtue, doing the very best they can, to accept a wide array of incompatible doctrines” (ibid.).  Even when objecting to said ‘incompatible doctrines’, few are the objections which succeed in the destruction of the theory with which they disagree (although Gettier and Gödel might have succeeded) (Lewis, %% @lewisPhilosophicalPapersVolume1983 %%1983, p. x). This is not to say that there are no true theories. It is entirely possible that Kantian Deontology is perfectly correct. But arriving at the truth is highly unlikely, due to the unreliability of Philosophers.

Additionally, it seems that there is hardly ever any consensus or agreement in Philosophy. Indeed, Van Inwagen concludes that “Philosophical agreement will come to pass when, and only when, for each important philosophical thesis, there is a knock-down argument either for that thesis or for its denial” (%% @vaninwagenFreedomBreakLaws2004 %%2004, p. 337). This is what makes it so rare. So inconclusive are theses and their objections that agreement hardly ever occurs. And of course, without agreement, how can we ever be sure that we have found the truth? The only agreement that we can come to is negative - for example, that knowledge cannot be defined as purely justified true belief (Van Inwagen, %% @vaninwagenFreedomBreakLaws2004 %%2004). Whilst this elimination of a thesis does seem to be progress, it opens up a can of worms, and numerous new questions to be answered. In the long-run, this is of little help to us.

The prior arguments are based from the conception of progress as edging ever nearer to the truth, however alternative conceptions are available. One is that progress in philosophy entails arousing more sophisticated debate, rather than coming closer to truth (Chalmers, %% @chalmersWhyIsnThere2015 %%2015). Assuming that truth will be found through philosophy is an unfair expectation, as “non-empirical fields shouldn’t be expected to make progress if progress is measured in terms of expert convergence over time” (Lougheed, %% @lougheedDisagreementDeepTime2019 %%2019, p. 296). Progress may also consist in the formulation of new philosophical methods, in order to aid us in our search for truth. However, it is important to note that Lougheed emphasises that “they are held in conjunction with the goal of pursuing philosophical truths” and that “[these conceptions of progress] aren’t worth pursuing on their own” (%% @lougheedDisagreementDeepTime2019 %%2019, p. 296). Thus, truth and convergence should still be held as the primary aim of Philosophy.

If we therefore conclude that Philosophy makes little to no progress in convergence of theories, as has been the consensus amongst prominent academics of recent years [ADD FOOTNOTE INCLUDING SOURCES], then we arrive at a new question, which may be the more important: does Philosophy only succeed if it makes progress?

We have previously concluded that Philosophy progresses towards truth. In this regard, we may argue that Philosophy is not successful, as it does not reach its aim. However, this is not the sole measure of success. Philosophy is studied in order to “enlarge our conceptions of what is possible, enrich our intellectual imagination, and diminish the dogmatic assurance of the mind against speculation” (Russell, %% @russellProblemsPhilosophy1912 %%1912, p. 94). In this, it certainly succeeds. Philosophical literature is ever-expanding, and our imaginations are ever enriched. All this, despite making little progress. The pragmatist would shun this view, seeing Philosophy as unsuccessful due to its lack of material value to the common man. But we must look beyond material value, seeing philosophy instead as valuable to the mind, and as valuable to our progression in society. Many a case exists in which Philosophy, despite not making any progress, has enriched our lives. Our problem-solving ability, the question of value, our ability to argue and debate: all of these are benefits garnered from philosophy. We study it to enrich ourselves and those around us, and these benefits are certainly evidence of success. The expansion of the field shows it to be highly successful. Further, philosophy gives us “moral and existential orientation… consolation and reflection” (Hansson, %% @hanssonProgressPhilosophyDialogue2012 %%2012). Thus, we can conclude that progress in philosophy is not necessary for its success.

Philosophy has been studied for millennia, and it remains unique as the only such field that has made little progress in that time. So we must ask ourselves, why do we continue to study it? There are two possible answers to this question. The first is that we are deluded. Dietrich (2011) argues that philosophers suffer from *anosognosia* (a neurological condition in which the patient is unaware of their neurological deficit). Their deficit is that they work in a field which never progresses, and yet still work. This creates cognitive dissonance, and thus philosophers deny that philosophy does not make any progress. And so they continue to philosophise. This is a pessimistic view, however. The alternative answer is much more optimistic: it is our nature. As naturally inquisitive beings, we refuse to settle for the answer ‘just because’. We are driven to find truth. This is why we have studied Philosophy in the past, and why it shall remain relevant many years into the future.

Perhaps one day, progress will be made. Chalmers hypothesises that humans are simply not yet evolved enough to be any good at philosophy, and that it may take another few millennia for us to be able to provide answers to the questions that we ask (2015). Lougheed looks into the evolutionary concept of ‘Deep Time’, an unfathomable period of time, billions of years. He concludes that “in order to know whether there will be any progress in philosophy, we need to keep fumbling around trying to philosophise for another billion years” (2019, p.311) . We ourselves will never know whether there is progress in philosophy, but that does not take away any of the meaning behind the study. It is still successful, no matter the timescale. All we can do now is to “simply do philosophy as well as we can, doing our best to come up with those new insights, methods, and concepts that might finally lead to us answering the questions” (Chalmers, 2015, p.31).
